@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This file is part of Guile-SMC Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2021-2022 Artyom V. Poptsov
@c See the file guile-smc.texi for copying conditions.

@node Log
@section Log

@code{(smc core log)} module contains Guile-SMC logging facilities.

@subsection The Precise Logger

@deftp {Class} <precise-logger>
Guile-SMC precise logger that prints log with microsecond accuracy.
@end deftp

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} precise-logger? x
Check if @var{x} is a @code{<precise-logger>} instance.
@end deffn

@subsection Log Drivers

Guile-SMC allows to set different log drivers (or handlers).  It uses
@code{<system-log>} by default.

@subsubsection System Log
@deftp {Class} <system-log>
This is a log handler which writes logs to the syslog.
@end deftp

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} system-log? x
Check if @var{x} is a @code{<system-log>} instance.
@end deffn

@subsubsection Precise Port Log

@deftp {Class} <precise-port-log>
Microsecond version of @code{<port-log>} from @code{(logging port-log)}.
@end deftp

@subsubsection Standard Error Log

@deftp {Class} <stderr-log>
Log driver that logs to the standard error port.
@end deftp

@subsubsection Null Log

@deftp {Class} <null-log>
Log driver that logs to the standard error port.
@end deftp

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} null-log? x
Check if @var{x} is a @code{<null-log>} instance.
@end deffn

@subsection Logging Initialization and Configuration

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} smc-log-init! (log-driver <string>) (log-options <list>)
Initialize Guile-SMC logging to the specified @var{log-driver} with
@var{log-options} list.

Known log drivers:
@itemize
@item ``syslog'' (@code{<system-log>})
@item ``file''   (@code{<precise-port-log>})
@item ``null''   (@code{<null-log>})
@end itemize

Return value is undefined.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} log-use-stderr! (value <boolean>)
Change whether the logger must print messages to the stderr as well as to
syslog, or not.
@end deffn

@subsection Helper Procedures

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} %precise-log-formatter lvl time str
The precise log formatter for @code{<precise-logger>}.
@end deffn

@subsection Logging Procedures

@deffn  {Scheme Procedure} smc-log level fmt . args
@deffnx {Scheme Procedure} log-error fmt . args
@deffnx {Scheme Procedure} log-warning fmt . args
@deffnx {Scheme Procedure} log-info fmt . args
@deffnx {Scheme Procedure} log-debug fmt . args
Log a formatted message of a specified logging @var{level} to syslog.
@end deffn

@c Local Variables:
@c TeX-master: "guile-smc.texi"
@c End:
