@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This file is part of Guile-SMC Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2021-2023 Artyom V. Poptsov
@c See the file guile-smc.texi for copying conditions.

@node PlantUML
@section PlantUML

The @code{(smc puml)} module contains a parser implementation for
@url{http://www.plantuml.com/, PlantUML} format.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Public API

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} puml->fsm port @
              [#:module=(current-module)] @
              [#:keep-going?=#f] @
              [#:debug-mode?=#f]

Read a FSM description from a @var{port} in the PlantUML format and convert it
to Guile-SMC @code{<fsm>} instance.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} puml-string->fsm port @
              [#:module=(current-module)] @
              [#:keep-going?=#f] @
              [#:debug-mode?=#f]

Convert a @var{string} in the PlantUML format and to Guile-SMC @code{<fsm>}
instance.
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection The PlantUML context

@deftp {Class} <puml-context> @
               #:module @
               [#:keep-going?=#f]

@table @asis
@item #:module
A module which contains state machine procedures.

@item #:keep-going? (value <boolean>)
Whether the parser should keep going when a procedure cannot be resolved or
not.

When set to #t, the parser remembers all unresolved procedures but keeps going
without issuing an error. All unresolved procedures are replaced with default
variants (@code{guard:t} for guards, @code{action:no-op} for actions.)
@end table

@end deftp

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} puml-context-fsm (context <puml-context>)
Get the @var{context} output finite state machine.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} puml-context-fsm-set! (context <puml-context>) @
       (fsm <fsm>)
Set the @var{context} output finite state machine.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} puml-context-module (context <puml-context>)
Get the @var{context} module.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} puml-context-keep-going? (context <puml-context>)
Check if ``keep going'' option is enabled for an PlantUML @var{context}.
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsubsection FSM Guards and Actions

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} title? ctx ch
Check if PlantUML diagram title is found.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} add-description ctx ch
Add FSM description.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} add-state-transition ctx ch
Add FSM state transition.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} process-state-description ctx ch

@end deffn

@deffn  {Scheme Procedure} validate-start-tag ctx ch
@deffnx {Scheme Procedure} validate-end-tag ctx ch
Validate start/end tags in a PlantUML data.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} throw-no-start-tag-error ctx ch
@deffnx {Scheme Procedure} throw-unexpected-end-of-file-error ctx ch
PlantUML parser context error reporting.
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsubsection Resolver status

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} puml-context-resolved-procedures @
               (puml-context <puml-context>)

Return a @code{<set>} of resolved procedures. Each element of the set is a
pair, where @code{car} of the pair is a module from which a procedure is
resolved, and @code{cdr} is a resolved procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} puml-context-unresolved-procedures @
               (puml-context <puml-context>)

Return a @code{<set>} of unresolved procedures. Each element of the set an
unresolved procedure name.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} puml-context-print-resolver-status @
               (puml-context <puml-context>) @
               (port         <port>)

Pretty-print a @var{puml-context} resolver status to the specified @var{port}.

@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Internal procedures

@deffn  {Scheme Procedure} puml-error ctx message
@deffnx {Scheme Procedure} puml-error ctx message . args
Throw an PlantUML error.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} resolve-procedure context proc-name default
This procedure tries to resolve a procedure @var{proc-name} in the provided
modules of a @var{context}. When no procedure available with the given name,
returns @var{default} procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} module-name module
Get the name of a @var{module}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} parse-event-source (line <string>)
Try to parse a @var{line} as an event source definition.  Returns a match or
@var{#f} if line does not match.

Example event source definition:
@example
event-source: some-event-source
@end example

@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} parse-entry-action (line <string>)
Try to parse a @var{line} as an entry action definition.  Returns a match or
@var{#f} if line does not match.

Example entry action definition:
@example
entry-action: some-entry-action
@end example

@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} parse-exit-action (line <string>)
Try to parse a @var{line} as an exit action definition.  Returns a match or
@var{#f} if line does not match.

Example exit action definition:
@example
exit-action: some-exit-action
@end example

@end deffn

@c Local Variables:
@c TeX-master: "guile-smc.texi"
@c End:
